[FC-0118] docs: add ADR for standardizing serializer usage (#38139)
openedx/edx-platform: docs/decisions/0025-standardize-serializer-usage.rst

Context
-------

Many Open edX platform API endpoints manually construct JSON responses using Python dictionaries instead of Django REST Framework (DRF) serializers. This leads to inconsistent schema responses, makes validation errors harder to manage, and creates unpredictable formats that AI and third-party systems struggle with.

Decision
--------

We will standardize all Open edX REST APIs to use **DRF serializers** for request and response handling.

Implementation requirements:

* All API views MUST define explicit serializers for request and response handling.
* Replace manual JSON construction with serializer-based responses.
* Use serializers for both input validation and output formatting.
* Ensure serializers are properly documented with field descriptions and validation rules.
* Maintain backward compatibility for all APIs during migration.

Relevance in edx-platform
-------------------------

Current patterns that should be migrated:

* **Certificates API** (``/api/certificates/v0/``) constructs JSON manually with nested dictionaries.
* **Enrollment API** endpoints manually build response objects without serializers.

> * **Course API** views use hand-coded JSON responses instead of structured serializers.

Reviewer: I think most of the course API uses serializers, but I did find one that needs fixed.

def get_block_metadata(block, includes=()):
    """Get metadata about the specified XBlock."""
    data = {
        "id": str(block.scope_ids.usage_id),
        "type": block.scope_ids.block_type,
    }
    if "index_dictionary" in includes:
        data["index_dictionary"] = block.index_dictionary()
    return data

           help_text="The certificate status (e.g., downloadable, generating)"
       )
       grade = serializers.FloatField(
           help_text="The final grade achieved"
       )

   # views.py
   from rest_framework.views import APIView
   from rest_framework.response import Response
   from rest_framework import status

   class CertificateAPIView(APIView):
       def get(self, request):
           data = {
               "username": "john_doe",
               "course_id": "course-v1:edX+DemoX+1T2024",
               "status": "downloadable",
               "grade": 0.95,
           }
           serializer = CertificateSerializer(data)
           return Response(serializer.data, status=status.HTTP_200_OK)

Consequences
------------

Positive
~~~~~~~~

* Simplifies validation and ensures consistent response contracts.
* Improves AI compatibility through predictable data structures.
* Enables automatic schema generation and documentation.
* Reduces code duplication and maintenance overhead.

Negative / Trade-offs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Requires refactoring existing endpoints that manually construct JSON.
* Initial development overhead for creating comprehensive serializers.

> * May require updates to existing client code that expects legacy formats.

Reviewer 2: When would we use API versioning for backward-incompatible changes? Is this standardization detail part of a larger plan? I feel like versioning should be made more explicit somewhere, no matter what the decision is.

Author: > When would we use API versioning for backward-incompatible changes?

We have mentioned `Maintain backward compatibility for all APIs during migration.` in our decisions, means serializers should construct same response.

> Is this standardization detail part of a larger plan?

Yes, we plan to standardize APIs within the existing Django REST Framework ecosystem.

> I feel like versioning should be made more explicit somewhere, no matter what the decision is.

I am not sure if we need to add API versioning (v1 -> v2) when we are considering backward compatibility.
But yes unintended changes could occur resulting in different response for some edge-case scenario.
@feanil what do you think on this? Do you want me to add & extend our decision statement `Maintain backward compatibility for all APIs during migration.` with something like below text.

```
Backward-incompatible changes introduced during migration (e.g., changes in response structure, field names, or validation behavior) MUST be handled via API versioning.
Existing API versions MUST remain unchanged to preserve backward compatibility for current consumers. Updated serializer-based implementations should be introduced under a new version (e.g., `/v0/` → `/v1/`), and first-party frontends should be migrated to use the new version.
Older API versions may be deprecated and removed over time following standard deprecation practices.

```

Author: FYI: We will also have some ADRs related to APIs as well for this standardization process. I think we can document the API versioning in the ADR related APIs.

Reviewer 3: I think this extra sentence is useful to add.  We can preface it with "While the goal is fully compatible DRF serializers, if that is not possible and we must make a backwards incompatible change, that change MUST be handled by creating a new version of the API and transitioning to that API using the deprecation process."

Reviewer 2: The above adds a lot of clarity. Thank you.

Alternatives Considered
-----------------------

* **Keep manual JSON construction**: rejected due to inconsistency and maintenance burden.
* **Use DRF defaults only**: rejected because explicit serializers provide better validation and documentation.

> * **Use newer ways of managing API responses such as dataclasses or pydantic**: rejected due to complexity and unknowns in transitioning from two existing patterns (manual JSON and DRF serializers) to a third approach. While these python libraries offer better ergonomics, migration would require checking nested serializers, complex validation, and ModelSerializer-heavy endpoints. Additionally, preventing new DRF serializers via linting is more complex than anticipated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Use newer ways of managing API responses such as dataclasses or pydantic**: rejected due to complexity and unknowns in transitioning from two existing patterns (manual JSON and DRF serializers) to a third approach. While these python libraries offer better ergonomics, migration would require checking nested serializers, complex validation, and ModelSerializer-heavy endpoints. To move to some new format, we would want to prevent using the basic DRF Serializers any more than we do right now, but preventing new DRF serializers via linting is more complex than anticipated.  This work can be revisited in the future once the platform is a bit more consistent.
```

Standardize Serializer Usage Across APIs
========================================

:Status: Proposed
:Date: 2026-03-09
:Deciders: API Working Group
:Technical Story: Open edX REST API Standards - Serializer standardization for consistency

Context
-------

Many Open edX platform API endpoints manually construct JSON responses using Python dictionaries instead of Django REST Framework (DRF) serializers. This leads to inconsistent schema responses, makes validation errors harder to manage, and creates unpredictable formats that AI and third-party systems struggle with.

> The recommendation in the standards document is to enforce serializer-based input/output handling for all endpoints to ensure consistent response contracts and improve validation.

Reviewer 3: Voice/Flow: We don't need this sentence, the decision is below and saying it's a reccomendation before we say it's a decision is confusing.

Decision
--------

We will standardize all Open edX REST APIs to use **DRF serializers** for request and response handling.

Implementation requirements:

* All API views MUST define explicit serializers for request and response handling.
* Replace manual JSON construction with serializer-based responses.
* Use serializers for both input validation and output formatting.
* Ensure serializers are properly documented with field descriptions and validation rules.

> * Maintain backward compatibility where possible during migration.

Reviewer 4: Should this be "all APIs" rather than "where possible"? If we're standardizing, we should commit to backward compatibility across the board. This will also be better aligned with the versioning ADR we plan to publish soon

Author: Yup, here we got a typo. I'll change it to "all APIs" where we are using serializers.

   from rest_framework.response import Response
   from rest_framework import status

   class CertificateAPIView(APIView):
       def get(self, request):
           data = {
               "username": "john_doe",
               "course_id": "course-v1:edX+DemoX+1T2024",
               "status": "downloadable",
               "grade": 0.95,
           }
           serializer = CertificateSerializer(data)
           return Response(serializer.data, status=status.HTTP_200_OK)

Consequences
------------

Positive
~~~~~~~~

* Simplifies validation and ensures consistent response contracts.
* Improves AI compatibility through predictable data structures.
* Enables automatic schema generation and documentation.
* Reduces code duplication and maintenance overhead.

Negative / Trade-offs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Requires refactoring existing endpoints that manually construct JSON.
* Initial development overhead for creating comprehensive serializers.
* May require updates to existing client code that expects legacy formats.

Alternatives Considered
-----------------------

* **Keep manual JSON construction**: rejected due to inconsistency and maintenance burden.

> * **Use DRF defaults only**: rejected because explicit serializers provide better validation and documentation.

Reviewer 5: What about using Pydantic models and/or dataclasses? Both are much nicer to work with than DRF Serializers. I believe drf-spectacular already supports Pydantic models, and [`djangorestframework-dataclasses`](https://github.com/oxan/djangorestframework-dataclasses) would support dataclasses.

Author: Good point — Pydantic(`drf-pydantic`) and dataclasses(`djangorestframework-dataclasses`) are definitely nice to work with. 
But the intent of this ADR, however, is mainly to standardize APIs within the existing Django REST Framework ecosystem, which edx-platform already relies on heavily. DRF serializers integrate directly with request parsing, validation, responses, and schema generation. Introducing wrapper libraries `Pydantic/dataclasses` would likely require additional translation layers and introduce additional dependencies and patterns that the platform would need to maintain long-term(shifting existing APIs from using drf serializers and use `Pydantic/dataclasses` instead), whereas serializers fit naturally into the current DRF stack and keeps things simpler and consistent with existing openedx-platform APIs. 
That said, I am still open to discussion like what would be the best path to approach standardization & consistency across the platform. 
@feanil what do you suggest on this.

Reviewer 3: Right now we are in a situation where some APIs use serializers and others build response documents more manually.  I like the idea of moving to newer easier to work tools but to fully do that we would need to migrate both sets of existing implementations no the 3rd new implementation. 

@Faraz32123 how much more work would that be and how quickly could we do it?

I'd love to move to dataclasses since they offer better ergonomics but I'm worried about continuing to run in a mixed state moving forward.

Alternative option: If we decide to only migrate the very oldest non-serializer use to Dataclasses, could we also use linting or import linting to prevent the creation of new standard DRF serializers?  eg. We leapfrog to the future we want for the oldest code, we make it so future new code doesn't use Serializers classes directly, we do future work to migrate the rest of the code to dataclasses.

Reviewer 5: I know that we rely heavily on DRF, and a much bigger priority should be making all our APIs consistent(ly using DRF), more so than migrating to newer tech.

It's also true that pydantic/dataclasses don't integrate so well with DRF, and are a better fit with newer frameworks like django-ninja. If we were starting from scratch, I would push strongly for django-ninja.

But since that's not the case, I think recommending only DRF serializers could be a reasonable recommendation. I just want to make sure we've considered the newer alternatives and made an explicit decision in this ADR. _If_ there's an easy way to bring in dataclasses or pydantic alongside serializers and slowly convert everything to dataclasses, I do think that would be better. But if it creates a mess, let's avoid it.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, @Faraz32123 maybe you can quickly dig into feasibility here and then we can either document it as a rejected alternative or potentially update our plan.

Author: > I'd love to move to dataclasses since they offer better ergonomics but I'm worried about continuing to run in a mixed state moving forward.

Yup, these native python libraries are fast & easier to work with But yeah I was also worried about the same mixed state. 

> Alternative option: If we decide to only migrate the very oldest non-serializer use to Dataclasses, could we also use linting or import linting to prevent the creation of new standard DRF serializers? eg. We leapfrog to the future we want for the oldest code, we make it so future new code doesn't use Serializers classes directly, we do future work to migrate the rest of the code to dataclasses.

I like your idea of using linting to prevent new standard DRF serializers. It would enforce the “future direction” while giving us breathing room to gradually migrate the rest.

> @Faraz32123 how much more work would that be and how quickly could we do it?

For migrating to dataclasses, the main work would be:

1. Oldest manual-response APIs - updating them to use DataclassSerializer for type safety, validation, and schema integration.
2. Longer-term migration of existing DRF serializers - as many endpoints rely on serializers and some have nested or complex validation.
Using linting/import rules, we can prevent new DRF serializers in new code as you have suggested, so we don’t increase mixed-state complexity moving forward.

> Agreed, @Faraz32123 maybe you can quickly dig into feasibility here and then we can either document it as a rejected alternative or potentially update our plan.

@feanil, To properly answer that, we’d need to scope the APIs across the platform and estimate roughly how many fall into each category. It would probably take around 2–3 days to get a reasonable estimate of the effort and feasibility. Let me know if that’s what you had in mind, then we can look into it. Based on the findings, we can then decide whether to document it as a rejected alternative or update our plan.

Reviewer 3: I want to understand if there are any technical issues with moving to Dataclasses using the djangorestframework-dataclasses library.  I also want to know how hard would it be to prevent usage of the default serializers across the platform moving forward.  Is it as simple as adding a new entry to the import linter for the base serializer classes coming from DRF and adding all the existing files to the exception list for now? Or would it need to be more complicated than that?

I don't think we need to understand how much effort it would be to convert all the existing serializers to dataclasses at this point.

Author: I had a quick look at these,

> I want to understand if there are any technical issues with moving to Dataclasses using the djangorestframework-dataclasses library.

`djangorestframework-dataclasses` with Django REST Framework is generally feasible because it integrates through `DataclassSerializer`, which behaves similarly to normal DRF serializers. There are no fundamental technical blockers, but migration would require checking:
- nested serializers
- complex validation logic
- ModelSerializer(that automatically maps Django models whereas `Dataclasses` do not automatically mirror Django models) heavy endpoints

> I also want to know how hard would it be to prevent usage of the default serializers across the platform moving forward. Is it as simple as adding a new entry to the import linter for the base serializer classes coming from DRF and adding all the existing files to the exception list for now? Or would it need to be more complicated than that?

I think its more complicated than just using our existing approach using import-linter([Link](https://github.com/openedx/openedx-platform/blob/831af2be3774eb73d3d2a4affcb6f577ae26e61e/pyproject.toml#L244)). I tried prototyping this with our existing import-linter setup. Unfortunately import-linter cannot forbid submodules of external packages, so we can't directly block `rest_framework.serializers`. It can only block top-level packages like `rest_framework`, which would also prevent legitimate DRF imports such as `APIView`, `Response`, or `status`.

Reviewer 3: Ok, thanks for taking a look at that.  Given the level of complexity and unknowns, I'm leaning towards pushing the dataclasses work further out, I think we gain a lot by just standardizing on the DRF serializers and the reduced complexity of not adding a new way to do things while trying to go from two ways to 1 way.

So let's add moving to other newer ways of managing APIs such as dataclasses or pydantic, as rejected alternatives because we want to not let un-knowns from those transitions block landing this more straightforward conversion to serializers.

What do others think of this?
